GWEN IFILL: Now to an inspiring
story about
one of last year's MacArthur
grant winners
and how design can change lives.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports
for our Breakthroughs series on
innovation
and invention.
JACKIE JUDD: In the hands of
Alex Truesdell,
a simple piece of cardboard
turns into a world
of possibilities. Her life's
mission began
by accident.
Truesdell was rooting around in
a closet at
a school where she was teaching
and found
a chair that had been made for a
disabled
adult.
ALEX TRUESDELL, Founder,
Adaptive Design Association:
The armrest and the footrest on
it were actually
at different heights on the left
side than
the right side. And I asked
about it, and
they said, oh, that's made of
cardboard. And
I think my head exploded.
JACKIE JUDD: Why did your head
explode?
ALEX TRUESDELL: The idea that
you could take
that material and turn it into
what you needed,
that, if you needed something,
you could make
something.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell has been
making something
ever since with her triple-ply
cardboard,
glue and simple tools. In New
York City, at
the Adaptive Design Association,
which she
founded, cardboard furniture and
learning
tools are built for children
with disabilities.
ALEX TRUESDELL: It makes the
child, one, believe
in their own capacity, and then
everyone who
knows and loves the child
believe in what
they're able to do. I think it
upends the
prognosis, because, so often,
unfortunately,
the word disability signals
broken, can't,
isn't.
JACKIE JUDD: Creating this very
individualized
furniture often involves a house
call. In
suburban New Jersey,
21-month-old Austin Kellenberger
is getting his first fitting for
a chair and
a table.
JOHN KELLENBERGER, Father of
Austin: Austin
has significant motor
development issues.
He has difficulty even moving
his arm.
JACKIE JUDD: Today, even as a
toddler, dad
John Kellenberger says, Austin
feels apart
from his twin brother and older
sister.
JOHN KELLENBERGER: Oftentimes,
my other son,
Dylan (ph), and my daughter,
Savannah (ph),
will be playing at the table
with toys. He's
not able to do that. So, you do
see he is
very frustrated. He wants to --
he's a very
social boy. He wants to be part
of the group.
JACKIE JUDD: This furniture is
supposed to
make that possible, to make
Austin feel less
different and to build his
physical strength.
ALEX TRUESDELL: Right now, he
fatigues quickly,
but he hasn't had the right
chair in order
to build strength. So, the
angles of this
will actually give him a bit of
a challenge.
JACKIE JUDD: Cardboard is
relatively inexpensive,
readily available and really
sturdy, a trifecta
for growing kids and for
families, often burdened
by medical costs, who are asked
for contributions
of just $500.
Austin's chair is measured, and
measured again,
and cut to within an eighth of
an inch, so
it is just exactly right for the
little boy.
ALEX TRUESDELL: We need a custom
fit in an
off-the-rack world. And if it
doesn't fit,
if the child struggles, and
they're already
struggling, it's going to use up
that energy
and be discouraging. And then
they or someone
else will give up, and get the
wrong idea
about the child's potential, as
opposed to
being inspired enough to change
the thing,
change the environment to make
it work.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell saw that
happen in
her own family, and it was a
life-changer.
Her uncle turned conventional
household tools
into something her aunt, who had
lost the
use of her hands, could
manipulate.
ALEX TRUESDELL: My uncle was
able to repurpose
things, bend things that were
too straight,
cut things that were too long,
connect things.
And that thought, that you could
engineer
change to suit her specific
needs, is really
the root of this.
JACKIE JUDD: The workshop has
turned out pieces
this year for more than 200 New
York area
kids, but many more children can
use them.
So, Alex Truesdell and her team
spend as much
time teaching as they do
designing and building.
In the last several years alone,
they have
led several hundred design
workshops and have
answered inquiries from around
the globe.
As a result, these cardboard
creations are
being built in about six U.S.
locations and
in countries as diverse as
India, Romania
and Peru.
ALEX TRUESDELL: We try to use
methods here
that could be used anywhere in
the world.
So, any technique, anything we
make, the materials
we use, we want other people to
see what we
do and copy it. We really are
trying to supply
the movement, so that we would
inspire imitation,
cooperation, and collaboration
throughout.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell sees some
children
only once and others throughout
their lives.
She met New York City teenager
Hannah Auchincloss
(ph) as a toddler, when Hannah's
mother, Tracy
Ehrlich, was struggling to find
a chair in
which Hannah could feed sitting
up.
TRACY EHRLICH, Mother of Hannah:
She couldn't
do any of those things, and she
was much too
small for conventional
wheelchairs.
JACKIE JUDD: So there was
nothing you could
have ordered online, or gone
into a medical
supply store and say, that's
what I need,
that's what would help her?
TRACY EHRLICH: No, absolutely
not, because
she was so young.
JACKIE JUDD: Ehrlich has lost
track of all
the pieces Truesdell has made
for Hannah,
and even some for her sisters,
so the family
feels bound together, instead of
separated
by Hannah's challenges. But some
pieces stand
out, like the bike, the scooter
and a beloved
rocking chair that Hannah can
get moving on
her own.
ALEX TRUESDELL: The experience
of moving herself
at just -- one thing she can
really control
every day.
TRACY EHRLICH: I think that all
of the different
pieces of equipment have opened
up the possibilities
for her, the opportunities for
her to interact
with her world, interact with
the people who
are around her.
JACKIE JUDD: In New Jersey,
Austin Kellenberger
is just beginning to interact
with his world.
His furniture has been
delivered. And what
most see as a simple chair, his
parents, John
and Danielle (ph), see as
transformative.
JOHN KELLENBERGER: I want Austin
to reach
whatever the potential that he
has. I want
him to reach that. I don't know
what that
is. The doctors don't know what
that is at
this point. But whatever it is,
I want to
give him every chance to meet
that. And this
is one of the -- frankly, this
is one of the
things that's helping us do
that.
JACKIE JUDD: Alex Truesdell
started out as
a teacher for the blind. What
she has done
is let children, thousands of
them, see and
experience movement, growth and
confidence,
all through a simple piece of
cardboard and
a lot of ingenuity.
This is Jackie Judd in New York
for the "NewsHour."